Building Encounters

The most common type of encounter is a combat encounter, where the PCs face other creatures. Combat encounters are strictly governed by rules; the guidelines that follow will help you build combat encounters that pose appropriate challenges for your group. Building hazard encounters works the same way. Social encounters are more free form, and are up to you as the GM to design.

To build a combat encounter, first decide how the encounter fits in the adventure as a whole. Then, estimate how much of a threat you want the encounter to pose, using one of five categories below.

Trivial threat encounters are so easy that the characters have essentially no chance of losing; they shouldn’t even need to spend significant resources unless they are particularly wasteful. These encounters work best as warm ups, palate cleansers, or reminders of how awesome the characters are. A trivial threat encounter can still be fun to play, so don’t ignore them just because of the lack of threat.

Low threat encounters present a veneer of difficulty and typically use some of the party’s resources. However, it would be rare or the result of very poor tactics for the entire party to be seriously threatened.

Moderate threat encounters are a serious challenge to the characters, though unlikely to overpower them completely. Characters usually need to use sound tactics and manage their resources wisely to come out of a moderate threat encounter ready to continue on and face a harder challenge without resting.

Severe threat encounters are the hardest encounters most groups of characters can consistently defeat. These encounters are most appropriate for important moments in your story, such as confronting a final boss. Bad luck, poor tactics, or a lack of resources due to prior encounters can easily turn a severe threat encounter against the characters, and a wise group keeps the option to disengage open.

Extreme threat encounters are so dangerous that they are likely to be an even match for the characters, particularly if the characters are low on resources. This makes them too challenging for most uses. An extreme threat encounter might be appropriate for a fully rested group of characters that can go all out, for the climactic encounter at the end of an entire campaign, or for a group of veteran players using advanced tactics and teamwork.

Once you’ve selected a threat level, it’s time to build the encounter. You have an XP budget based on the threat, and each creature costs some of that budget. Start with the monsters or NPCs that are most important to the encounter, then decide how you want to use the rest of your XP budget. Many encounters won’t match the XP budget exactly, but they should come close. 

Table 10 1: Encounter Budget
Threat:	XP Budget
Trivial: 50
Low:	75
Moderate: 100
Severe: 150
Extreme: 200

In all but the most unusual circumstances, you’ll select creatures for your encounter that range from 4 levels lower than the PCs’ level to 4 levels higher (see Table 10–2: Creature XP and Role). Each creature has a part to play in your encounter, from a lowly lackey to a boss so mighty it could defeat the entire party single handedly.

Each creature costs some of the XP from your XP budget for the encounter, based on its level compared to the levels of the characters in your party. For instance, if the PCs are 5th level, a 2nd level creature is a “party level – 3” creature, a lackey appropriate for a low  to moderate threat encounter, and it costs 15 XP in an encounter’s XP budget.

Table 10 2: Creature XP and Role

Creature Level	XP  Suggested Role
Party Level  4	10	Low threat lackey
Party Level  3	15	Low  or moderate threat lackey
Party Level  2	20	Any lackey or standard creature
Party Level  1	30	Any standard creature
Party Level	40	Any standard creature or low threat boss
Party Level +1	60	Low  or moderate threat boss
Party Level +2	80	Moderate  or severe threat boss
Party Level +3	120	Severe  or extreme threat boss
Party Level +4	160	Extreme threat solo boss

